===== Page 1 =====
SPRINT RETRO NOTES DATE OF THE MEETING:   7 MARCH 2022    Project: OPM (Online Patient Management)  Team: X1   Attended Absent Scrum Master Severus Snape  Development Team Harry Potter, Ron Weasley, Hermione Granger, Neville Longbottom, Luna Lovegood, Draco Malfoy
Product Owner Dr Strange  Customers Iron Man, Thor   Sprint #: 1  1. What went well? Scrum retro meetings have to be scheduled on a regular basis. They are scheduled for each sprint, after the Sprint Review meeting, to discuss what went well and what should be improved. The goal of Scrum retro meetings is similar to what is proposed in Kanban: continuous improvement of the development process. We would like to improve our team work and our process, so it is very important to us to conduct these meetings and to keep all the notes properly. This is an important meeting, and the whole team should attend it. We discuss “things that went well” because we would like to highlight that we should keep these things (or related ideas) while working on the future sprints. Draco was able partially rescue the Sprint Review meeting by explaining towards the end of the meeting (under the support of the Scrum Master) that the functionalities planned for this sprint were actually implemented – the demo made an impression that only front-end is implemented with stubs instead of back-end.  We were also lucky that there was no troll in the Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom, when Hermione went there to cry after the Sprint Review meeting.   2. What went not so well? Scrum retro meetings help us to reflect on what we need to do better in the upcoming sprints. Therefore, to achieve this goal, we have to analyse with the whole team what wasn’t good in this sprint. The core aim of this discussion is to identify what exactly we should do differently in the upcoming sprints – what we should change.  As a new team starting a project on development of Online Patient Management system for our clients Iron Man and Thor (under support of the Product Owner Dr Steven Strange), we were thinking that our capacity might be 13-15 story points as
===== Page 2 =====
SPRINT RETRO NOTES DATE OF THE MEETING:   7 MARCH 2022    per level of estimations that we are using. However, we would like to clearly mention in our notes that the current sprint clearly demonstrated to us and our amazing Scrum Mater that we could do more as a team.   We were very proud of how many functionalities were implemented, but the demo was very upsetting to us – Hermione even cried for a while in the Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom (luckily, there was no troll issue this time!). Moreover, our customers looked upset as well, and the Product Owner wasn’t really happy. So, we would like to highlight that this was mostly Ron’s mistake – he didn’t prepared well his part of the demo at all, and his laptop battery became empty in the middle of presentation. Harry and Neville wasn’t prepared as well (Gryffindor!), and Hermione didn’t have her laptop ready to present instead of them.   3. Lessons learned  It is crucial to analysed what lessons can we learn from our experiences within each sprint. Each sprint we might learn something about technologies, our working style, etc., and it’s important to make notes about these findings. There were many lessons learned from this sprint. In what follows, we will try to summarise the most important lessons in a short and precise matter, so that next sprint we could compare whether the team has actually learned from the issues (crying in the bathroom doesn’t help, changes are needed!). Scrum retro meetings are crucial for the team’s success while using the Scrum methodology. It is important to mention that one of the points that we need to discuss in these meetings are the situations or facts that surprised us. The reason for this is very simple (almost obvious!): if something surprised us, we have to learn out of it, take this new knowledge into account, so that the same point doesn’t surprised us again (even when the surprise was positive and nice). We would like to have cadence, we would like to learn from our experience. This all will help us to have a better planning for the future sprints. First of all we would like to note that the team deeply analysed what velocity might be more realistic in the current circumstances. Thus, the team finally decided that the planed velocity will be largely increased. This is an important and very timely decision, which we had to make now to improve our planning. It is obvious that having a more estimate of our velocity will help us to have more realistic planning. Dr Strange’s cloak of Leviation – it was amazing! Even when Ron thinks that it hardly can be used in quidditch. The cloak of levitation might be useful for quidditch from Harry’s point of view, but Ron thinks that the broomstick is much better tool.
===== Page 3 =====
SPRINT RETRO NOTES DATE OF THE MEETING:   7 MARCH 2022    Things to Keep: We have to continue this project even when the first Sprint Review meeting was a disaster. Things to Change: Everything.