===== Page 1 =====
SPRINT PLANNING NOTES DATE OF THE MEETING: 6 MARCH 2023    Project: OPM (Online Patient Management) Team: X1   Attended Absent Scrum Master Severus Snape  Product Owner Dr Strange  Development Team Harry Potter, Hermione Granger, Neville Longbottom, Luna Lovegood, Draco Malfoy Ron Weasley Customers (optional)    Sprint duration Sprint # Start Day End Day Total Working Days Expected capacity Expected Velocity 2 weeks 1 6 March 2023 17 March 2023 9 85% 27 story points  Monday 13 March is a public holiday in Victoria (Labour Day). Ron is on sick leave and expects to return only next sprint.  1. Team’s goal (vision) for this sprint The aim of this sprint is to create the first shippable product increment that covers the basic functionality on patient management. The following features will be implemented as the basic functionality on patient management: 1. Login features of all type (PBI 3) 2. Patient registration (PBI 1) 3. Patient search (PBI 24) 4. Patient record modification (PBI 8) 5. Adding information to patient record (PBI 12) These features will allow to demonstrate to the end-users how this part of the tool might be applied, and the Product Owner requested to implement the above functionalities.   2. Scope of the sprint: Estimation PBI 3: As an authorised user, I want to log into system so that I can gain authorisation. 3 story points – the implementation of this functionality will be easy, but we will need to create the corresponding data base tables first, which will also take some time (we are going to start from this PBI).
===== Page 2 =====
SPRINT PLANNING NOTES DATE OF THE MEETING: 6 MARCH 2023    PBI 1: As an admin, I want to register new patients so that there is a record of them in the system. 13 story points – we will need to implement the checks for input fields to avoid incorrect registration. PBI 24: As a doctor / nurse I want to search for a patient records so that I can view and update patients’ data 5 story points – we will implement three types of search (by the last name, by the phone number, by Medicare number) but all three types are very similar in implementation and the query is simple. The complexity of this story is in the visualisation of the retrieved data (this functionality should be covered by PBI 24 as well) PBI 8: As an admin/ doctor / nurse I want to edit patient information so that the patient record is up-to-date. 3 story points – this will be easy to implement, as we will reuse many functions created for PBI 1 (PBI 1 should be implemented first). PBI 12: As a doctor/ nurse I want to add notes to a patient’s record, so that I can inform other staff of any extra details about the patient, outside of the general patient information. 3 story points – we will implement new checks for input fields to avoid incorrect data input (might also require some cross checks with previous entries for this patient), this will take time.