Dr Maria Spichkova
Senior Lecturer in Software Engineering
Week 4: Lectorial
ISYS 1108 / 3474
Software Engineering 
Project Management
Acknowledgement of Country
RMIT University acknowledges the people of the 
Woi wurrung and Boon wurrung language groups of 
the eastern Kulin Nation on whose unceded lands 
we conduct the business of the University. 
RMIT University respectfully acknowledges their 
Ancestors and Elders, past and present. 
RMIT also acknowledges the Traditional Custodians 
and their Ancestors of the lands and waters across 
Australia where we conduct our business.
2
Classes and Deadlines
Week 
1
Week 
2
Week 
3
Week 4 Week 
5
Week 
6
Week 
7
Week 8 Week 9 Week 
10
Week 11 Week 12
Lectorials
Workshops Team
work
Team
work
A1: SE 
Challenge
Friday: 
Challenge 1
10%
Friday: 
Challenge 2
10%
Friday: 
Challenge 3
10%
A2: Team-
based 
assignment 
Due on 
Friday: 
30%
A3: 
Individual 
Assignment
Due on Friday:
40%
Mid-semester break is between Weeks 5 and 6 
Team-based 
assignment 
activities
Our plan for this session
Agile planning
Sprint 0
Agile time estimation
Scrum process (Scrum meetings)
4
+ any questions you 
have on related 
material ☺
Agile 
Planning

Planning: When?
Traditional, plan-driven project management 
approaches typically attempt to do more of the 
planning prior to the start of the project
Agile project management approaches 
typically defers planning decisions to “the last 
responsible moment”:
Rolling Wave Planning
▪ You typically start with a high-level plan that is sufficient for defining at least 
the vision, scope, and objectives as defined in the project charter.
▪ The details of the plan and the requirements are further elaborated as the 
project progresses – to the level of detail is needed at that point to support 
whatever level of planning and estimation is required for the project 
▪ By the last responsible moment,  we mean the latest point in time that a 
decision can be made without impacting the outcome of the overall project. 
Planning strategies
Suppose you expect to complete the project in 
eight months, but only have clarity for the first 
three months: 
▪ You would plan only for those three months. 
▪ as the project progresses and you gain more 
clarity, you would then plan for the remaining 
months.
However, this method for planning does not exempt you from 
creating a list of milestones and assumptions for the entire project.
It is necessary to provide key milestones and assumptions as they 
will help stakeholders see why you are using Rolling Wave Planning 
and what to expect as the project progresses.
That is why you have been asked to create charter and WBS ☺
Progressive elaboration
Planning too far in advance == some amount of speculation. 
Quite often, that speculation is wrong and will result in 
wasted effort in replanning later, might also require 
reworking any work that has been done based on erroneous 
assumptions.
Planning requirements [too far in advance] should not stop 
you from progressing with the implementation works in the 
project   
Requirements should only be defined to the extent needed 
to support whatever decisions or action is required at that 
particular point in time.

Progressive elaboration
From the recommended textbook:

Developing requirements in 
Agile project
A very important principle in Agile is simplicity 
and limiting a solution to what is “just barely 
good enough” to solve the problem. 
There is an optimum point, and beyond that 
point, adding additional features has diminishing 
value.
It requires close collaboration with the 
stakeholders to find where that optimum point is. 
A good way is 
▪ to start with the simplest and most basic 
solution possible 
▪ then add to it incrementally and iteratively only 
to the extent that it adds value to the user.

MoSCoW technique
Must have: 
▪ Requirements labelled as “MUST” have to be included in the current 
delivery time box in order for it to be a success. 
▪ If even one “MUST” requirement is not included, the project delivery 
should be considered a failure.
Should have:
▪ “SHOULD” requirements are also critical to the success of the project
▪ Are not necessary for delivery in the current delivery time box.
Could have:
▪ Requirements labelled as “COULD” are often seen as nice to have. 
Won’t have:
▪ “WON’T” requirements are either the least -critical, lowest-payback items, 
or not appropriate at that time.

1.Vision & Scope document: Specify the product features 
2.Product Backlog: Specify PBIs on the basis of the product features. 
Some PBIs might be technical, but most of them are functional.                     
▪ PBIs are about the what
▪ PBIs represent business value (ideally, from the customers’ perspective)
▪ PBI == user story / epic
▪ User story should be small enough to be completed within a sprint
3.Sprint Backlog: Specify tasks on the basis of PBIs.                            
▪ Sprint tasks are about the how
▪ A task is a step by the team to create the business value (represented by 
PBI)
▪ A task should be small – no bigger that 1 day of work
▪ Some teams prefer to specify small enough PBIs, so that tasks are not 
even necessary
Sprint 0
It is a term that has become popular over the last few years. 
Sprint 0 == the time when the following artefacts are created:
▪ Vision & Scope (or Product Charter) documents, 
▪ rough product backlog which allows creating an estimation of a 
product release(s).
Some Scrum Masters (Scrum purists ☺) still consider it as a bad 
practice: you do not have typical Scrum meetings over that period, the 
activities within Sprint 0 do not require burn down chart (the burn 
down starts from Sprint 1), etc. separate the pre-sprints activities. 
The popularity of this term is growing, and the many organisations like 
to use it, arguing that “0” highlights the special nature of the sprint. 
13
Project Management Artefacts in Scrum
Project Charter 
or Vision & Scope Document
Product Backlog
Sprint Backlog (Sprint 1)
Sprint 0
Sprints 
1, 2, 3, 
4, 5, …
Sprint Backlog (Sprint 2)
Sprint Backlog (Sprint 3)
Burt-
down 
chart
Sprint 1 
planning notes
Sprint 2
planning notes
Sprint 3 
planning notes
…
Sprint 1 
retro notes
Sprint 2
retro notes
Sprint 3 retro 
notes
Action time ☺
Let’s go to www.menti.com ☺

Agile time estimation

Estimation of Product Backlog items
Establishes team’s velocity (how much effort a team can handle in one sprint)
Units of complexity:
▪ Size-category (“T-Shirt size”) - we will learn about this later on lectures
▪ Story points – this is the standard Scrum approach
▪ Work days/work hours - you know about this already ☺
Methods of estimation:
▪ Expert Review
▪ Using a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) 
Agile estimation issues
There are two common problems with Agile estimation:
▪ Analysis Paralysis: 
▪ Spending too much time  attempting to develop detailed 
estimates
▪ Delaying making commitments until all of the information 
required to make decision has high level of certainty. 
▪ Cavalier approach:
▪ Not worrying about managing uncertainty and risk at all and just 
starting the project with no  planning at all
▪ Assuming that whatever uncertainty and risk is inherent in the 
project will be discovered and somehow work itself out as the 
project succeeds
…. So management of uncertainty is very important 

Story Points
Traditional software teams give estimates in a time format: days, 
weeks, months. 
Many agile teams, however, have transitioned to story points. 
Story points rate the relative effort of work in a Fibonacci format: 
0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144
(in many versions, a Fibonacci-like variant is used:  
0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 20, 40, 100).  
Why are story points are used?

Why story points?
✓ Dates/hours don’t account for the non-project related 
work that inevitably creeps into our days: emails, 
meetings, etc 
✓ Dates/hours  have an emotional attachment to them. 
Relative estimation removes the emotional attachment.
✓ Each team will estimate work on a slightly different scale, 
which means their velocity (measured in points) will 
naturally be different. This, in turn, makes it impossible to 
play politics using velocity as a weapon.
The relative size of story points 
provides some information to the 
product owner to assess the business 
value against the level of the effort

Story Point calculations
In reality it is very hard for a new agile team to start calculating story 
points because they have no frame of reference to compare it to.
Sometimes Product Owner/Scrum Master might make it easier for 
them by stating: one story point == one person-day of work
But, as team gets experienced such scales are not necessary – they 
can make their decisions based on past experience 
What is the process?
✓ A voting technique is used to estimate the level of effort 
associated with each story in story points   
✓ Project team determines the team’s velocity in story points 
based on number of story points completed in a sprint.
✓ You can then find out how many sprints are required = 
(Total of story points)/velocity of team in story points per sprint) 
Estimation techniques: Planning Poker
To begin, each team member is given a set of cards with numbers on them.  
The numbers are usually ordered from 0 to 21 (20) using the Fibonacci -(like) 
sequence: 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, and 21 (20).
Then each story is read aloud. After each story is presented, 
everybody on the team is asked to hold up the card showing 
the level of effort that they believe this story represents for the 
team.
Once all the votes are in, the team members with the lowest 
and highest estimates explain why they chose their scores.
Through this process, everybody on the team learns more 
about what’s involved in estimating stories both inside and 
outside of their specialties, increasing knowledge sharing 
across the entire team.
With planning poker, the numbers are significant. A story estimated as 
a 2 should be about one fourth as difficult as a story estimated as an 8.
Stories estimated at 21 (20) or higher may be so large that they need 
to broken up into smaller stories before they can be attempted.
Estimation techniques: T-shirt sizes
Items are categorised into t-shirt sizes: 
XS, S, M, L, XL, XXL. 
This is a very informal technique, and can be used 
quickly with a large number of items. 
Usually, the decisions about the size are based on 
open, collaborative discussion, possibly with the 
occasional vote to break a stalemate. 
The T-shirt sizes need to be converted to numerical 
values for the sake of tracking effort over time and 
charting an estimated velocity for the team.

Action time ☺
Let’s go to www.menti.com ☺

Scrum 
process
25
Sprint Calendar
Ref: https:// andybacon.com / used for educational -purposes only
Sprints: Scrum Meetings
Sprint Planning Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review Meeting
Sprint Retro
Backlog Refinement 
Meeting
Backlogs
The Product Backlog represents the larger picture and 
lists epics and stories for a product. 
A Sprint Backlog is concerned with the stories and tasks 
that are to be undertaken within a sprint. 
The items in sprint backlogs come from the product 
backlog during sprint planning. 
This is something you have to complete in 
your assignment ☺
Agility requires learning to split large epics into user 
stories representing very small product features. 
Backlog Refinement Meeting
Backlog Grooming
▪ to prepare the Product Backlog for the next Sprint Planning Meeting.
▪ the team estimates the amount of effort they would expend to 
complete items in the Product Backlog and provides other technical 
information to help the Product Owner prioritize them. 
also called:
• Backlog Grooming
• Backlog Maintenance
• Story Time
Large vague items are split and clarified, considering 
both business and technical concerns – more valuable 
features to be delivered first. 
Sometimes a subset of the team, in conjunction with the 
Product Owner and other stakeholders, will compose 
and split Product Backlog Items before involving the 
entire team in estimation.
Sprint Planning Meeting
Sprint Planning Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review Meeting
Sprint Retro
Backlog Refinement 
Meeting
Sprint Planning Meeting
Sprint Backlog 
==  the set of Product Backlog items selected for the Sprint
+ a plan for delivering the product Increment and realizing the Sprint Goal
The Sprint Backlog is a forecast by the Scrum (Development) Team 
The Team modifies the Sprint Backlog throughout the Sprint.  
Only the Team can change its Sprint Backlog during a Sprint.  
The Sprint Backlog is a highly visible, real-time picture of the work that the Team 
plans to accomplish during the Sprint, and it belongs solely to the Team.
Sprint Planning Meeting is a meeting 
dedicated to the Sprint Backlog creation
Scrum Guide 2013: “Sprint commitment” was replaced by “Sprint forecast”
So how does it all start?
1.The Product Owner prioritises and identifies all of the work items 
in the Product Backlog (PB)
2.The Team estimates the workload, focusing on the of the highest 
priority items 
3.The Team commits a number of Product Backlog Items (PBIs) into 
Sprint Backlog – from the top of the PB, based on the team velocity                 
Sprint Backlog == 
a list of tasks that will be completed during a sprint
4.Each task must then be broken into sub tasks
▪ Why is this necessary?
▪ Can you think of an example?

Sprint Backlog: Template
Canvas ➔ Modules ➔ Templates, Tools, Team-allocation ➔ Useful Templates
Can be replaced by a 
single column “Status”
Important: 
If a PBI is allocated to a Sprint Backlog, 
you must have a User Story card for it –
Acceptance Criteria should be specified
To create a good Sprint Backlog...
1. All items of value that you intend to deliver at the end of sprint as a potentially 
shippable product
2. Involve every team member in the process
3. Discuss how every item should be implemented
4. Always have a definition of done
5. Identify all kinds of task
6. Review the sprint commitment
7. How much buffer time should be built?
Don’t assign tasks up front 
Respect the time box 
There are several views regarding 
these two points. Let’s discuss...
Sprint Planning Notes 
1. Goal
What is the aim that you are trying to achieve by running this sprint?
2. Duration of the sprint
2 weeks
3. What is the team’s vision for this sprint?
Which items of the product backlog will be committed to sprint backlog and why? 
What will the potentially shippable product look like in the end? 
What features will it have in its working form?
4. Estimation in story points
Team to estimate story points for each of the items. Provide some sort of justification.
Short notes –
max. 2 pages
Canvas ➔ Modules ➔ Templates, Tools, Team-allocation ➔ Useful Templates
Estimation
Remember to make sure to…
✓ Use relative units (e.g., A is half as hard as B)
✓ Take into account team members’ skill levels, knowledge and external 
interruptions and unexpected technical issues
✓ Solicit group input on estimations
✓ Have everyone estimate in same units while performing planning poker
✓ Do not estimate when your team is unsure about the specifics - if not sure, ask 
questions (in some cases it is also acceptable to delay the item to the next sprint)
✓ Be realistic ☺
Don’t forget that you need time 
not only for implementation but 
also for testing and integration!
Daily Scrum
Sprint Planning Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review Meeting
Sprint Retro
Backlog Refinement 
Meeting
Daily
 Stand
-
ups 
(
Daily
 Scrum, Project Status Meetings)
Limited to 15 minutes 
Are focused on the tasks at hand 
Are typically held in front of a progress board  
Are structured so that each person answers three primary questions: 
1. What did you accomplish yesterday? 
2. What are you going to accomplish today? 
3. What obstacles are in your way?
In many situations, it isn’t possible to have that level of collocation and the communications 
practices 
• distributed teams that may not be in the same geographical location and could even 
be in different time zones, which is often the case with offshore development teams. 
➔ you have to adjust the communications strategy to fit the team 
Ideally, agile teams are co-located 
in the same room to facilitate 
direct face-to-face 
communications  
In case of geographically distributed teams
Video conferencing might be used in lieu of face -to-face communications. 
Wikis might be used for sharing of information. 
Online status boards might be used in lieu of physical wall boards
▪ For example, Trello or  Jira
Daily standups might need to be extended or supplemented with other 
meetings to provide more communications
▪ for example, using slack.com
However, online tools are often used also by 
the teams that work from the same location.
Why?
Sprint Review Meeting
Sprint Planning Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review Meeting
Sprint Retro
Backlog Refinement 
Meeting
Sprint Review Meeting
Appropriate to invite external stakeholders to attend:                         
▪ It is the opportunity to inspect and adapt the product as it emerges, and 
iteratively refine everyone’s understanding of the requirements
▪ Many customers need to be able to react to a piece of functioning software to 
discover what they will actually want. Iterative development, a value-driven 
approach, allows the creation of products that couldn’t have been specified 
up front in a plan-driven approach.
1. Demonstration (demo)  
▪ Live demo not a report
▪ Do not spend extra time on preparing slides, if this can be avoided
2. Product Owner reviews the commitments made at the Sprint Planning Meeting and
▪ declares which items he/she now considers done
▪ incomplete items are returned to the Product Backlog and ranked according to the 
Product Owner’s revised priorities as candidates for future Sprints

Sprint Retro Meeting
Sprint Planning Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review Meeting
Sprint Retro
Backlog Refinement 
Meeting

Sprint Retrospective (Retro) Meeting
Each Sprint ends with a retrospective meeting -
the team reflects on its own process:
▪ What went well?
▪ What could have gone better?
▪ What do we want to try next?
▪ What puzzles us? 
They inspect their behavior and take action to 
adapt it for future Sprints.
There are several solutions for this
An in-depth retrospective requires an environment of 
psychological safety not found in most organisations. 
Without safety, the retrospective discussion will either 
avoid the uncomfortable issues or deteriorate into 
blaming and hostility. 

Sprint Retro Notes 
1. Things That Went Well
What went well? What the team is happy about?
2. Things That Could Have Gone Better
What could have gone better? What the team could improve?
3. Things That Surprised Us
What wasn’t expected?
4. Lessons Learned
What you learned from the above points?
5. Final Thoughts
Things to Keep
Things to Change
Short notes – max. 2 pages
Canvas ➔ Modules ➔ Templates, Tools, Team-allocation ➔ Useful Templates
Sprint planning and retro notes: What we need to check?
45
1. Do the planning notes match to the backlog / Trello 
board?
2. Do the planning notes clearly specify the goal and 
vision for each sprint?
3. Do the planning notes provide a proper justification 
for the estimations?
4. Do the retro notes match to the backlog / Trello 
board?
5. Do the retro notes properly reflect the progress 
within the sprint and, in the case the team had any 
issues, the issues as well?

Action time ☺
Let’s go to www.menti.com ☺

Questions?
 Essentially, all models are 
wrong, but some are useful. 
George E.P . Box