Dr Maria Spichkova
Senior Lecturer in Software Engineering
ISYS 1108 / 3474
Software Engineering 
Project Management
Week 5: Workshop
Acknowledgement of Country
RMIT University acknowledges the people of the 
Woi wurrung and Boon wurrung language groups of 
the eastern Kulin Nation on whose unceded lands 
we conduct the business of the University. 
RMIT University respectfully acknowledges their 
Ancestors and Elders, past and present. 
RMIT also acknowledges the Traditional Custodians 
and their Ancestors of the lands and waters across 
Australia where we conduct our business.
2
Our plan for 
this session
Sprint Planning Notes
Sprint Retro Notes
Trello Retro board
Discussion on the results of SE 
Challenge 1
Discussion on T eam-based 
assignment
3
Activity 1: Sprint Planning Notes and
Sprint Retro Notes – general discussion
Discuss with the tutor the following questions:
• Who should create these notes and when?
• How much time this work should take? 
• How many pages you typically need to write?
Duration: approx. 10  minutes
Sprint Planning Notes
Sprint Retro Notes 
Who should create them and when: 
The notes have to be written by the Scrum Master during 
the corresponding meeting.  
How much time this work should take: No extra time on 
top of the meeting time, you have to create them during the 
meeting (scribe the core points of the discussion). 
 
How many pages you typically need to write: 
The notes should be short, max 2 pages. 
Write short simple sentences, avoid having long 
paragraphs. Keep only necessary details. Proof-read!

Sprint Planning Notes 
1. Goal
What is the aim that you are trying to achieve by running this sprint?
2. Duration of the sprint
2 weeks
3. What is the team’s vision for this sprint?
Which items of the product backlog will be committed to sprint backlog and why? 
What will the potentially shippable product look like in the end? 
What features will it have in its working form?
4. Estimation in story points
Team to estimate story points for each of the items. Provide some sort of justification.
Short notes – 
max. 2 pages
Canvas ➔  Modules ➔ Templates, Tools, Team-allocation ➔ Useful Templates
Sprint Retro Notes 
1. Things That Went Well
 What went well? What the team is happy about?
2. Things That Could Have Gone Better
 What could have gone better? What the team could improve?
3. Things That Surprised Us
 What wasn’t expected?
4. Lessons Learned
 What you learned from the above points?
5. Final Thoughts
 Things to Keep
 Things to Change
Short notes – max. 2 pages
Canvas ➔  Modules ➔ Templates, Tools, Team-allocation ➔ Useful Templates
8
Activity 2: Sprint Planning Notes – Example 1
SprintPlanningNotes_Sprint1_OPM.pdf
These notes are correct. 
Discuss them within your team and then with 
the tutor, section by section.
Duration: approx.  15  minutes
9
Correct! The meeting as at the very first day of the sprint.
Let’s look at another correct version:
10
11

12

Activity 3: Sprint Planning Notes – Example 2
Check the document
SprintPlanningNotes_Sprint1_withMistakes.pdf
 
What are the mistakes in these notes? 
Discuss this within your team and then with your tutor.
Duration: approx.  15  minutes
Let’s discuss  SprintPlanningNotes_Sprint1_withMistakes.pdf
✘ Scrum Master and Product Owner are the same person. 
Either this is a typo that should be fixed, or the issue is in 
role allocation. Scrum Master and Product Owner roles 
should not be allocated to the same person.
✘ This version of the goal makes no sense – you cannot 
have high-level good-praxis rules as a goal, the goal 
should be specific for the sprint and focusing on the 
functionality 
✘ Duration of a sprint cannot be 1.5 weeks – we need to 
have 1 or 2 week(s) duration, same for all sprint.
✘ Planning meeting should be the very first activity in the 
sprint, but the sprint starts on 27 February and the 
meeting was on 1 March. This is incorrect.
✘ Justification for estimates are missing.  

15
Activity 4: Sprint Retro Notes – Example 1
SprintRetroNotes_Sprint1_OPM.pdf
These notes are correct. 
Discuss them with tutor section by section.
Duration: approx. 15 minutes


17

18

Activity 5: Sprint Retro Notes – Example 2
Check the document
SprintRetroNotes_Sprint1_withMistakes.pdf
What are the mistakes in these notes? 
Discuss this within your team and then with 
your tutor.
Duration: approx. 20  minutes
Let’s discuss SprintRetroNotes_Sprint1_withMistakes.pdf (1)
✘ Date: either it’s typo, or the meeting wasn’t held at 
the very end of the sprint, which is incorrect.
✘ Product Owner and customers should not attend 
the retro meeting, it should be a team-internal 
meeting (only the team and the Scrum Master 
should attend)
✘ The tone of this version is aggressive, focus is on 
blaming rather than on improving the situation

✘ This version of “Things that went well (What went well)” 
is unacceptable:
• The first paragraph – the content is correct, but this 
text doesn’t belong to the notes. The notes should 
be short and focused on actual points discussed at 
the meeting. 
• The second and the third paragraphs: 
aggressive/unfriendly tone, details out of scope. 
Let’s discuss SprintRetroNotes_Sprint1_withMistakes.pdf (2)
Let’s discuss SprintRetroNotes_Sprint1_withMistakes.pdf (3)
✘ This version of “Things that could have gone better 
(What went no so well)”  is unacceptable:
• The first paragraph – the same issue as with the first 
section. The content is correct, but this text doesn’t 
belong to the notes. The notes should be short and 
focused on actual points discussed at the meeting. 
• The second paragraph: too wordy, too many 
introductory sentences/ phrases, so many 
unnecessary details that it’s even hard to identify 
what was actually the point to improve. 
• The third paragraph: too many unnecessary details, 
aggressive tone, blame shifting 

Let’s discuss SprintRetroNotes_Sprint1_withMistakes.pdf (4)
✘  This version of “Lessons learned” is unacceptable:
• The first and second paragraph – the same issue as with 
the first section. The content is correct, but this text 
doesn’t belong to the notes. The notes should be short 
and focused on actual points discussed at the meeting. 
• The third paragraph: too wordy, too many unnecessary 
details. 
• The fourth paragraph: out of scope. Even when the cloak 
of levitation might be a real surprise, it’s out of scope 
here.
•  This version of “Final thoughts” is unacceptable – neither “things 
to keep” nor “things to change” make any sense in this version.

24
There is an alternative to retro notes document –        
a retro board, it can be created in Trello. 
Let’s compare the document 
SprintRetroNotes_Sprint1_OPM.pdf
With the corresponding  Trello RETRO board
Note: A Trello RETRO board is NOT the same as a 
Trello board for a Scrum project (Trello Scrum board)
Activity 6: 
Sprint Retro Board in Trello
Duration: approx. 15 minutes
Easier to read:
• visual, 
• potentially less cognitive load,
• Push you to be short/precise 
in wording
Missing information:
• Attendance 
• Dates
25
https://trello.com/b/hkaQsLWx/sprint-
retrospective-template-trello
Sprint Retro Board in Trello: General points
26

27

28

29

30

Activity 7: Discussion on the results of SE Challenge 1
Have you checked your results of SE Challenge 1?
Do you have any questions on your results?
Duration: approx. 10 minutes
Don’t hesitate to ask tutor at the 
workshop if you have any questions. 

Activity 8: Discussion on Team-based assignment
Step 1: Analyse the scenario, which was inspired by a real-life problem: 
Assume that a Scrum team is working on a software development project. 
Sprint 1 of the project starts on 15 September. The project will be planned for 
6 weekly sprints.
Assume in this scenario that
• The Scrum team consist of all members of your team.
• Dr Maria Spichkova is the Product Owner.
• Your workshop tutor is the Scrum Master.
• Osheen Walawedura is the customer who requested access to the 
information radiator.
The goal of the project is to develop a software system for a small local 
company producing handmade scarves, which can be picked up from their 
small shop or delivered. Currently, they use a simple Excel spreadsheet to 
plan their orders, but as their business is growing, they would like to automate 
the ordering process and have a cashless payment only.For the details of 
the required features of the system, please read the Notes made during 
the initial requirements elicitation interviews with the stakeholders. Like 
in a real project, these notes are not fully structured and have to be analysed 
and organised by you: you will need to analyse the notes, identify the details of 
the functionalities to implement, including their priorities for the project.
Step 2: Based on your analysis of the above notes, collaboratively create the 
following artefacts during the Week 6 and 7 workshop sessions: …
Duration: 
approx. 10 minutes
Do you know who is in your team?
Do you have any questions to the tutor?
Have you read the assignment specification?
Don’t hesitate to ask tutor at the workshop if 
you have any questions! 
Please check the marking criteria 
(below you can see the first 2 criteria)  
