Tutorial #1
Cloud Security INTE2401/2402
1. Multiple Choice Questions
Which service model is an example of a cloud computing environment that provides users with a web based e­mail service?
A. Software as a Service
B. Platform as a Service
C. Computing as a Service
D. Infrastructure as a Service
Which service model is an example of a cloud computing environment that provides users access to virtual machines?
A. Platform as a Service
B. Software as a Service
C. Application as a Service
D. Infrastructure as a Service
How do users access Software as a Service cloud services?
A. Thick client
B. Local client
C. Web browser 
D. Command line
What is a hypervisor? 
A. A hypervisor is a virtual machine.
B. A hypervisor is a virtual machine monitor.
C. A hypervisor is a virtual machine manager console. 
D. A hypervisor hosts a virtual machine.
What are Type 1 hypervisors? 
A. Type 1 hypervisors run directly on the system hardware.
B. Type 1 hypervisors run on a host operating system.
C. Type 1 hypervisors run over virtual machines.
D. Type 1 hypervisors run over applications.
A virtual machine is composed of  
A. Hardware, operating system and application.
B. Operating system and application.
C. Hardware, hypervisor, operating system.
D. Hypervisor and operating system.
Which of the following involves prevention of unauthorized withholding of information?
A. Confidentiality
B. Integrity
C. Availability
D. Accountability
Which of the following is active attack?
A. Eavesdropping
B. Modification
C. Masquerade 
D. Both B and C
Authentication is needed to prevent
A. Eavesdropping
B. Impersonation 
C. Brute force 
D. Cryptanalysis
In the model of conventional encryption, the encryption key is known to 
A. Sender 
B. Receiver 
C. Eavesdropper
D. Both A and B
2. Computational Questions
Encrypt PASSWORD with a shift cipher with key = 6.
Find the plaintext and the key from the ciphertext GSQIFEGO given that the cipher is a shift cipher.
3. Programming (HTML and JavaScript) Questions
Familiar with JavaScript (basic functions) via W3SCHOOL.
Create an input box (HTML) and retrieve a Plaintext for Caser Cipher using JavaScript function. 
             (hint: get input value)
Split the Plaintext to an array of characters
             (hint: split string to array)
Substitute each Plaintext letter with Ciphertext letter when key is 3, refer to Lecture 1 page 59
(hint: if statement)
Potential solution: demo here